---
layout:			post
title:			"Compression"
subtitle:		"Bigger isn't always better"
date:			2015-11-20 04:20:00
author:			"Ashwin Madavan"
header-img:		"img/compress-bg.png"
---

# Introduction
Compression is a two step process: modeling and coding. Coding is how you represent the bits (Huffman Coding, Range Encoding, Arithmetic Coding, Asymmetric Binary Coding), modeling is what the bits represent. Coding is a solved problem, but modeling is not. There is no such thing as universal compression; in other words, there is no algorithm that is guaranteed to reduce the size of a file. However, there is no lower bound on how much a good model can compress data. For example, if the data in your file was 3.141592653 then you could model the all the data as just pi. *My compression algorithm uses curve fitting to model the bytes in a file as a function of their position in the file.* 

# Expression
Expressions are one-dimensional functions that can be evaluated at various values in a thread-safe manner. There are two kinds of expressions: *stack expresssions* and *tree expressions*. Stack expressions and tree expression are both compositions simpler operations like addition and sine; however, stack expressions store these operations in reverse polish notation (postfix) and tree expressions store these operations in a parse tree. Tree based evaluation makes it simpler to manipulate the tree and allows evaluation to be easily parallelized. However, stack based evaluation is much simpler to implement and should be faster on a single-core machine because it avoids the overhead of recursive function calls. Tree and stack expressions are interoperable and are equivalent ways of representing the same information.

## Benchmarks



# Curve Fitting
## Least Squares Regression
## Discrete Fourier Regression
## Genetic Regression

# Mitigating Error
## Modified Chunking Algorithm
## Genetic Bit Weight Optimizer

# Encoding and Decoding
## Java Serialization
## Kryo Serialization
## Custom Serialization

# Results

Cover photograph by [data.gov.bc.ca](http://www.data.gov.bc.ca/local/dbc/images/feature/img_bg_slider2.png).
