---
layout:			post
title:			"Why I'm Long TWTR"
category:		"Journal"
date:			2016-04-01 04:20:00
author:			"Ashwin Madavan"
header-img:		"img/twitter-bg.jpg"
---

The case for Twitter requires a lot more than 140 characters. Investors and analysts have been flocking away from Twitter in droves. When they look at the quantitative and qualitative evidence, they see a company in distress. But what if they're just looking at the wrong evidence? 

The best place to begin analyzing a company is its failings. When people cite Twitter's failings, they typically discuss its (1) stagnant user growth, (2) poor revenue growth, (3) mediocre product changes, and (4) rampant abuse.

According to its annual report, Twitter is in the business of "creating and sharing ideas and information without barriers." In other words, the success of the company can be measured by its ability to encourage real-time commentary and conversations on its website. Most analysts point to declining *tweets per user* when making the argument that Twitter is failing in its core mission. However, content on Twitter is not created equally. Because of its asymmetric follow model, there is no obligation for mutual connection. As a result, content created by some users can have a significantly higher reach and impact than that of others. A better metric for quantifying Twitter's ability to satisfy its core mission statement would be *follower-weighted tweets per user*.

- Insert statistical analysis of follower-weighted tweets per user
	- Random sample of tweets
	- Avoid selection bias (time, user, topic, etc.)
	- Contrast follower-weighted tweets per user with tweets per user
		- How do the two metrics differ?
		- Do they have similar trends?

The biggest reason why Twitter is here to stay is **data licensing**. Twitter does not need to monetize its user base, it needs to monetize the *activity* of its user base. Twitter has always had a massive repository of tweets and sold access to its "firehose" tweet stream (500m tweets/day), but people have only recently started to figure out how to use its data.

- Insert analysis of data licensing segment
	- Show graphs of increasing revenues
	- Show graphs of increasing customers
- Insert analysis of companies that use Twitter data
	- DataSift
	- Brandwatch
	- Jive
	- Selerity
	- Dataminr
- Stress how Twitter data has varied uses in a range of industries
- Stress how Twitter data represents unadulterated commentary and conversations
	- People post what is on their mind, not what they think people want to see
- Ways for Twitter to improve data licensing
	- Make it easier to consume the data
		- Extract out features
		- Make it easier to conduct statistical analysis
	- Make it more accessible
		- Cheaper price point encourages innovation
		- Streamline application process

http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/04/a-eulogy-for-twitter/361339/
Reasons not to invest in Twitter.
- Poor 10K
- Stagnant user growth
- Fake accounts, abuse, bots
- Mediocre product changes

https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1418091/000156459016013646/twtr-10k_20151231.htm#Item_1A_RISK_FACTORS
This is my first time actually reading a 10K. Here is my summary.
- Business Overview (2013)
	- Global platform for real-time communication and public self-expression
	- High velocity of information exchange
	- Nearly 240 MAUs, 500 million Tweets a day
	- Asymmetric follow model
	- 67 billion online impressions in fourth quarter 2013
	- Mobile focused
- Business Overview (2015)
	- Create and share ideas and information without barriers
	- Live commentary, live connections, live conversations
	- Periscope + Vine
		- Mobile applications
		- Broadcast from a  GoPro
	- Advertising
		- Promoted tweets, accounts, and trends
		- MoPub
		- Twitter audience platform
		- Performance marketing option (TellApart) + cross-platform retargeting
	- Developer tools
	- Data licensing
	- 990 issued patents (correlation between patents and growth?)

http://www.newyorker.com/tech/elements/the-end-of-twitter
What should worry Twitter isn't the value of its stock, but *irrelevance*. Twitter has enough cash to sustain operations for another four-hundred and twelve years, but preferences have shifted to other social media platforms like Snapchat, Instagram, and WeChat.

http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/technology/2014/05/twitter_is_not_dying_it_s_on_the_cusp_of_getting_much_bigger.html
Twitter is not a social network, it's a media platform.

http://www.fool.com/investing/general/2014/11/05/heres-how-twitter-is-boosting-its-revenue.aspx
Twitter seems to be reaching the saturation point for advertisements per timeline view and its timeline views per user are falling. While the advertisement division has been growing consistently, it is quickly approaching maximum size. Twitter does not need to monetize its user base, it needs to monetize the *activity* of its user base. Part of the reason why companies are hesitant to license Twitter data is because they don't know how to effectively use it. Twitter needs to package its data better from consumption. It needs to make it easier to extract meaningful features from its vast datasets.

http://www.bbc.com/news/business-24397472
Twitter Revenue Model
- 85% comes from advertising revenue
	- Promoting tweets, accounts, trends
	- Pay per click/retweet
	- Non-intrusive
	- Bidding system
	- 65% of ad revenue comes from mobile
- Data licensing (The Firehose)
	- DataSift
	- Brandwatch
	- Jive
	- Selerity
	- Dataminr

Cover photograph by [Marketing Gland](http://marketingland.com/wp-content/ml-loads/2014/07/twitter-bird-fade-1920.jpg).
