---
layout:         basic
title:          "Caustic"
subtitle:       "Reinventing database transactions"
category:       "Projects"
date:           2017-09-14 04:20:00
author:         "Ashwin Madavan"
header-img:     "img/caustic-logo.png"
---

The full code and documentation is available on [Github][1]. Cover photograph by [Samyuktha Sridhar][5].

# Introduction
---
Databases are either easy to use or easy to scale. For example, relational databases were popularized in large part because of the programmability of SQL. However, this programmability comes at an incredible expense. Relational databases are notoriously difficult to support at scale, and so developers have increasingly turned toward more specialized NoSQL systems that scale well be shedding functionality. 

Developers are not only forced to choose between productivity and performance, but also stark differences between query languages makes their choice of database effectively permanent. Even databases that claim to support the same SQL standard only implement incompatible subsets of its functionality. The lack of a truly uniform interface tightly couples databases and the procedures that are executed against it. 

Caustic is a language for expressing and executing transactions on arbitrary key-value stores that is both straightforward to use and simple to integrate. In this article, we'll discuss the implementation and implications of the transaction runtime and syntax.

# Runtime
---
The runtime package is responsible for executing transactions on arbitrary key-value stores. In this section, we'll see how transactions are represented, what kinds of databases are supported, and how transactions are executed.

## Representation
A ```Transaction``` is represented by an [abstract-syntax tree][2]. A ```Literal``` corresponds to a "leaf" of this tree and an ```Expression``` corresponds to a "node". The runtime respects three different types of literals ```Real```, ```Text```, and ```Flag``` (correspond to ```String```, ```Double```, and ```Boolean``` respectively) and thirty different kinds of expressions. With just these types and operations the runtime is able to emulate a modern programming language complete with conditional branching, loops, and local variables.

For example, the transaction ```write(text("x"), add(read(text("x")), real(1)))``` increments the counter ```x```. While this language is fully featured, it is extremely verbose and very unintuitive. In the next section, we'll implement a more convenient syntax for expressing transactions.

## Interoperability
The runtime supports any asynchronous, transactional key-value store that satisfies the following interface. A ```Key``` is a unique ```String``` and a ```Revision``` is a tuple containing a version number and a literal value, which the runtime uses to implement [Multiversion Concurrency Control][3].

```scala
/**
 * An asynchronous, transactional key-value store.
 */
trait Database {

  /**
   * Asynchronously returns the latest revisions of the specified keys.
   *
   * @param keys Lookup keys.
   * @param ec Implicit execution context.
   * @return Latest revisions of the specified keys.
   */
  def get(keys: Set[Key])(
    implicit ec: ExecutionContext
  ): Future[Map[Key, Revision]]

  /**
   * Asynchronously applies the specified changes if and only if the revisions of the 
   * specified dependent keys remain constant and returns an exception on conflict. The 
   * consistency, durability, and availability of the system is determined by the 
   * implementation of this conditional put operator.
   *
   * @param depends Dependencies.
   * @param changes Updates.
   * @param ec Implicit execution context.
   * @return Future that completes when successful, or an exception otherwise.
   */
  def cput(depends: Map[Key, Version], changes: Map[Key, Revision])(
    implicit ec: ExecutionContext
  ): Future[Unit]
```

## Execution
Transactions are executed through repeated partial evaluation, according to the following procedure.

1. __Fetch__: Call ```get``` on all keys that are read and written by the transaction, and add the returned revisions to a local snapshot. In order to guarantee snapshot isolation, ```get``` is only called when a key is read or written *for the first time*. By batching reads and writes and avoiding duplicate fetches, the runtime is guaranteed to perform a minimal number of roundtrips to and from the database. 
2. __Evaluate__: Recursively replace all expressions that have literal operands with their corresponding result. For example, ```add(real(1), sub(real(0), real(2))) => real(-1)```. The result of all ```write```expressions is saved to a local buffer and all ```read``` expressions return the latest value of the key in either the local buffer or snapshot.  
3. __Repeat__: Re-evaluate the transaction until it reduces to a literal. Because all expressions with literal operands return a literal, all transactions eventually reduce to a literal.

# Syntax
---
The language exposed by the runtime is primitive and verbose. As transactions become larger in size and broader in scope, it becomes more challenging to write correct and maintainable programs. In this section, we'll introduce the ```Caustic``` programming language and use to to implement a distributed counter.

## Language
The grammar of the language is very similar to that of Scala and [Thrift][3]. In fact, the grammar is so similar that the compiler is able to rewrite programs as Scala implementations of Thrift interfaces. Therefore, all programs are interoperable with any Thrift-compatible language and all existing JVM infrastructure. For example, consider the following example of a distributed counter in Caustic. Because Caustic is entirely transactional, no synchronization mechanisms (locks, semaphores, etc.) are required to guarantee that the counter is distributable. __Concurrency is automatic!__ 

```
module caustic.example

/**
 * A total quantity.
 * 
 * @param value Current total.
 */
record Total {
  value: Integer
}

/**
 * A distributed counting service.
 */
service Counter {
  
  /**
   * Increments the total and returns the current value.
   * 
   * @param x Total reference.
   * @return Current value.
   */
  def increment(x: Total): Integer = {
    if (x.exists) {
      x.value += 1
    } else {
      x.value = 1
    } 
  }

} 
```

[1]: https://github.com/ashwin153/caustic
[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_syntax_tree
[3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiversion_concurrency_control
[4]: https://thrift.apache.org/
[5]: https://samyusridhar.github.io/
