---
layout:         post
title:          "Caustic"
subtitle:       "Reinventing database transactions"
category:       "Projects"
date:           2017-06-01 04:20:00
author:         "Ashwin Madavan"
header-img:     img/caustic-bg.png"
---

The full code and documentation is available on [Github][1].

# Introduction
---
Caustic is a Scala [DSL][2] for expressing and [optimistically executing][3] transactions on arbitrary key-value stores. The word *caustic* refers to a substance, especially a strong acid; capable of destroying or eating away by chemical action. It is a fitting name for the library, because it is precisely the [ACID][4] properties of database transactions that prevent race conditions between concurrent processes acting on shared data.

As a motivating example, consider the following two transactions written in MySQL and Caustic that both increment some counter ```x```. Notice how the Caustic transactions does not require an explicit schema definition. Furthermore, the Caustic transaction is database agnostic; it will run on *any* transactional key-value store (including MySQL).

```sql
CREATE TABLE `counters` (
  `key` varchar(250) NOT NULL,
  `value` BIGINT,
  PRIMARY KEY (`key`)
)

START TRANSACTION;
INSERT INTO `counters` (`key`, `value`) VALUES ("x", 1) 
ON DUPLICATE KEY UPDATE `value` = `value` + 1
COMMIT;
```

```scala
Caustic { implicit ctx =>
  val counter = Select("x")
  If (!counter.exists) {
    counter.value = 1
  } Else {
    counter.value += 1
  }
}
```

# Caustic vs. SQL
---
SQL has reigned as the database language of choice for the past 43 years. It's time for a change.

## Programmability or Scalability
SQL stands for "structured query language" and it is precisely the structure, or [schema][4], that SQL provides that has made traditional relational databases so popular. While schemas provide an intuitive, organizational structure that simplifies data manipulation, they are notoriously difficult to support at scale. Large tech companies are increasingly turning towards "schema-less" key-value stores like Google's Spanner, Facebook's Cassandra, and Amazon's DynamoDB. Clearly, developers are now forced to make a conscious tradeoff between the *programmability* of a schema and the *scalability* of a NoSQL key-value store. **Why can't we have both?**

Caustic provides a **dynamically-typed schema** over any transactional key-value store. Therefore, developers get both the usability of a relational structure and the performance of a key-value store.

## Disparate Interfaces
SQL syntax varies wildly from database to database, particularly when writing transactions. Because most of these "dialects" of SQL are not interoperable, it is extremely challenging to change the underlying database once development is under way. The tremendous expense of rewriting database queries is a significant reason why larger companies are locked into their existing database infrastructure and are unable to modernize them. **Why does the syntax of the query language have to depend on the underlying database?**

Caustic provides a **uniform interface** for expressing and executing database transactions. This means, for example, that the same transaction will work without modification on MySQL, PostgreSQL, and Cassandra.

## Deficient Functionality
SQL lacks functionality that is common to most modern programming languages. Because SQL has no concept of important constructs like conditional branching, loops, and local variables, it is extremely difficult to express programs in SQL that are relatively straightforward in other languages. This has the effect of making SQL extremely difficult to correctly write and easily maintain. **Why can't SQL be as expressive and comprehensible as other programming languages?**

Caustic's features include local variables, loops (While/For/Foreach), conditional branching (If/Else), references, secondary indices, json results, automatic memory management, and transaction rollback, many of which are **difficult or impossible to express in SQL**. An exhaustive enumeration of supported operations can be found in the [Appendix][5].

## Testability
Testing an application built on a SQL database is extremely expensive, because it involves costly database setup and tear down operations before and after each test run. This leads to longer build times, slower deploy queues, and reduced productivity. **Why can't SQL databases be easier to test against?**

Caustic provides out-of-box support for an ```InMemoryDatabase``` that can be bootstrapped and queried in sub-milliseconds. This in-memory implementation can be swapped in to completely mock the database layer and dramatically reduce test times and deploy headaches.

# Future Work
---
Caustic is very much a work in progress. Here are some of the ideas that are in the pipeline.

- Python, C++, Java, and Rust bindings.
- Additional database integrations (currently only MySQL and PostgreSQL).
- Distributed, transactional key-value store implementation.
- SQL to Caustic converter.
- Caustic command-line interface.

Cover photograph by [wallup.net][6].

[1]: https://github.com/ashwin153/caustic
[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain-specific_language
[3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Optimistic_concurrency_control
[4]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_schema
[5]: https://github.com/ashwin153/caustic/wiki/Appendix
[6]: http://wallup.net/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/50079-abstract-psychedelic.png
