---
layout:         post
title:          "Schema"
subtitle:       "Distributed, transactional, key-value stores"
category:       "Projects"
date:           2017-02-27 04:20:00
author:         "Ashwin Madavan"
header-img:     img/schema-bg.jpg"
---

The full code and documentation is available on [Github](https://github.com/ashwin153/schema).

# Introduction
A distributed system is a collection of independent machines that concurrently operate on some shared data model. Designing distributed systems is extremely challenging, particularly because it is difficult to ensure [transactional consistency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_consistency#Transaction_consistency) across all machines. In other words, it is difficult to build a system that guarantees that all machines will always have identical views of the shared data model. Transactional [key-value stores](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Key-value_database) are a useful primitive for building distributed systems, because they ensure that this shared data model is transactionally consistent.
In this article we’ll discuss partial modification and type safety, as well as a method of building distributed transactions for any key-value store.

## Partial Modification and Type Safety
Transactional key-value stores allow two machines to perform concurrent modifications, as long as they modify different keys. However, it is often the case that multiple machines would like to modify different *fields* of the same value. No key-value store that I am aware of is capable of supporting these “partial modifications”. A system that is capable of performing partial modification would have significantly higher write throughput that a system is not, because fewer transactions would conflict. The ```schema-core``` library enables partial modification on any key-value store by storing the fields of objects as separate key-value pairs. This ensures that fields of the same object can be independently accessed and modified.

By itself, storing fields as separate key-value pairs is not a revolutionary concept. What’s interesting is that ```schema-core``` allows the fields of objects to be stored as separate key-value pairs *without sacrificing static type-safety*. Because key-value stores may contain values of arbitrary type, it is impossible to know at compile time the type of the value for any particular key. This vastly complicates the syntax of programs, because it requires values to be dynamically cast to their expected type at runtime. Furthermore, dynamic casting can lead to fatal errors at runtime when types are not what they are expected to be. The library mitigates this problem by leveraging proxies. A proxy for a type is a delegate object which relies on some underlying implementation to fulfill all field accesses and modifications. When objects are queried from a key-value store, they are returned as proxies that delegate to the key-value store itself. However, thanks to [Shapeless](https://github.com/milessabin/shapeless), these proxy objects are statically-typed. Therefore, all field accesses and modifications are fulfilled by the key-value store, while retaining their static type information. The library allows programmers to benefit from a statically-typed data model and from the scalability, durability, and consistency of a key-value store.

## Transactions
Transactions are hard. Many popular key-value stores either do not support them like Memcached or do so poorly like [Cassandra](http://stackoverflow.com/a/3007465/1447029). The ```schema-distribute``` library attempts to mitigate this problem by providing simple implementation of transactional modifications for any key-value store using a variation of the approach described in [Tango](http://www.cs.cornell.edu/~taozou/sosp13/tangososp.pdf).

### What is compare and swap?
Suppose there exists some variable ```x = 0``` that is persisted in some shared storage between two machines. Each machine would like to read the value of ```x```, increment it, and then write the new value back to storage. For example, the first machine would read the value of ```x``` to be ```0```, increment it to ```1```, and then write ```x = 1``` back to storage. However, if the second machine reads the value of ```x``` before the first machine finished writing the new value, it also will read the value of ```x``` to be ```0```, increment it to ```1```, and then write ```x = 1``` back to storage. Clearly, two increments have been performed, but the effect of only one is recorded in storage.

This behavior is incorrect and it is a specific example of a [race condition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Race_condition), or a situation in which the order of execution affects the outcome of a concurrent operation. In general, this kind of non-deterministic behavior is bad, because it means that a program will have unpredictable behavior. One technique for eliminating race conditions is [compare-and-swap](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compare-and-swap). According to Wikipedia, compare-and-swap "compares the contents of a memory location to a given value and, only if they are the same, modifies the contents of that memory location to a given new value." In the previous example, each machine would first compare the current value of ```x``` in storage to the value that they read. Only if these values match is the new value of ```x``` written. Clearly, the first increment in the previous example would succeed. However, the second increment would fail, because it is expecting ```x = 0``` but ```x = 1``` after the first increment. Therefore, the value of ```x``` in storage accurately reflects the number of increments that were performed and, consequently, compare-and-swap eliminates the race condition.

### Generalized compare and swap
We may generalize this compare-and-swap operator to arbitrarily many variables. For example, suppose that you now have two variables ```x``` and ```y``` and you would like to safely increment ```x``` if and only if both ```x``` and ```y``` are unchanged. Each machine first compares the current value of both ```x``` and ```y``` in storage to the value that they read. Only if *both* these values match is the new value of ```x``` written. This procedure is often referred to as multi-word compare-and-swap and it is useful for solving a broad class of problems in distributed systems.

We may further generalize this procedure of safely incrementing a set of variables, to performing safe modifications to a key-value store. Like ```x``` in the previous example which could be read and written, there are a set of permissible instructions that may be performed on a key-value store. Namely, key-value pairs may be read, inserted, updated, and deleted. By serializing these multi-word compare-and-set operations containing these instructions over a shared log, we can determine which operations succeed by reading the log and performing each mutli-word compare-and-set operation in order.

## Examples
Let’s use [Schema](https://github.com/ashwin153/schema) to solve the distributed increment problem discussed above.

```scala
// Define the data model.
case class Variable(value: Int)

// Construct a transaction manager backed by a Redis key-value store.
val manager = RedisManager(RedisSnapshot.empty)

// Perform safe, transactional increments to x.
this.manager.txn { schema =>
  schema.select[Variable]("x") =>
    case Some(x) =>
      x('value) = x('value) + 1
      Commit()
    case None =>
      schema.insert("x", Variable(0))
      Commit()
  }
}
```

Cover photograph by [Pixels Talk](http://www.pixelstalk.net/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/Data-Wallpaper-for-Desktop.jpg).
