---
layout:         basic-black
title:          "Caustic"
subtitle:       "Reinventing database transactions"
category:       "Projects"
date:           2017-11-06 04:20:00
author:         "Ashwin Madavan"
header-img:     "img/caustic-logo.png"
---

The full code and documentation is available on [Github][1]. Cover photograph by 
[Samyuktha Sridhar][2].

# Introduction
---
Concurrency is hard. Some languages like [Rust][5] are capable of statically detecting concurrency 
errors, or race conditions, that occur when multiple threads on a single machine simultaneously 
operate on shared data. But most languages, including Rust, do little to guarantee correctness when 
confronted with simultaneous operations on data shared across multiple machines, so architects of 
distributed systems are forced to rely *explicitly* on unintuitive, error-prone synchronization 
mechanisms like [distributed locks][8] to safely coordinate concurrent actions across a cluster.

Caustic is a robust, transactional programming language for building safe distributed systems. 
Programs written in Caustic may be distributed arbitrarily, but they will *always* operate safely on 
data stored within *any* transactional key-value store without *any* explicit synchronization.

# Background
---
A __race condition__ is a situation in which the order in which operations are performed impacts the 
result. As a motivating example, suppose there exist two machines ```A``` and ```B``` that each 
would like to increment a shared counter ```x```. Formally, each machine reads ```x```, sets 
```x' = x + 1```, and writes ```x'```. If ```B``` reads *after* ```A``` finishes writing, then 
```B``` reads ```x'``` and writes ```x' + 1```. However, if ```B``` reads *before* ```A``` finishes 
writing, then ```B``` reads ```x``` and also writes ```x'```. Clearly, this is a race condition 
because the value of the counter (```x' + 1``` or ```x'```) depends on the order in which ```A``` 
and ```B``` perform reads and writes. This particular race condition may seem relatively benign. Who 
cares if two increments were successfully performed, but the effect of only one was recorded? 
Imagine if the value of ```x``` corresponded to your bank balance, and the increments corresponded 
to deposits. What if your bank only recorded every second deposit? Still don't care? While race 
conditions manifest themselves in subtle ways in distributed systems, they can often have 
catastrophic consequences.

A __transaction__ is a sequence of operations that are atomic, consistent, isolated, and durable. 
These [ACID][6] properties (from which Caustic derives its name!) make transactions a formidible 
tool for eliminating race conditions. 

- __Atomic__: Transactions are all-or-nothing. Either all of their operations complete successfuly, 
  or none of them do.
- __Consistent__: Transactions must see the effect of all successfully completed transactions.
- __Isolated__: Transactions cannot see the effect of in-progress transactions.
- __Durable__: Transaction effects are permanent.

If the machines in the previous example had instead *transactionally* incremented ```x``` *if and 
only if the value of ```x``` remained unchanged*, then whenever ```B``` read before ```A``` finished 
writing, ```B``` would detect the modification to ```x``` by ```A``` when writing ```x'``` and 
would fail to complete successfully. Because the value of ```x``` now depends only on the
*number* of successful increments and not on the *order* in which they are applied, the race
condition no longer exists.

A __key-value store__ is a data structure that asssociates a unique value to any key. For example, a 
dictionary is a key-value store that associates a unique definition to any word. Key-value stores 
are the essence of every storage system; memory is a key-value store that associates a unique 
sequence of bytes to any address, and databases are key-value stores that associate blobs of data to 
any primary key. A __transactional key-value store__ is simply a key-value store that supports 
transactions. While transactions are challenging to correctly implement, there are an enourmous 
number of storage systems that are capable of handling them. Examples range from 
[software transaction memory][7] solutions for single machines to powerful databases like 
[Cassandra][8] and [MySQL][9] for larger clusters.

Clearly, transactions are a useful primitive for building correct distributed systems and there 
are a plethora of storage systems capable of handling them. However, these transactional storage 
systems each have their own unique language for specifying transactions that are often lacking in 
functionality and performance. Recent years have marked an explosion in NoSQL databases, that scale
well by shedding functionality. These databases were not popularized because of their query
languages, they were *in spite of them*. Some like [CQL][11] and [AQL][12] attempt to mimic SQL, 
but, while similar in name and intent, most fall short of implementing the entire SQL specification.
Others like [MongoDB][13] and [DynamoDB][14] have their own bespoke interfaces that are often so 
complicated that they require [classes][15]. But even SQL is not beyond reproach. In his article 
["Some Principles of Good Language Design"][10], CJ Date, one of the fathers of relational 
databases, outlined a number of inherent flaws in the SQL language including its lack of a canonical 
implementation and its ambiguous syntax. While these storage systems provide the necessary
transactional guarantees that are required to build safe distributed systems, their lack of a robust
interface makes it impossible to design nontrivial applications.

Caustic is a powerful and performant programming language for expressing and executing transactions
against *any* transactional key-value store. Caustic couples the robust functionality of a modern 
programming language with the ACID guarantees of a transactional key-value store, both of which are 
necessary to architect correct distributed systems.

# Runtime
---
The Caustic Runtime is a virtual machine that executes transactions on any transactional key-value
store that supports: ```get``` and ```cput```. The ```get``` operation retrieves the values of a set 
of keys, and the ```cput```, or conditional put, operator updates the values of a set
of keys if and only if a set of dependent keys remain unchanged. Internally, the Caustic Runtime
uses [Multiversion Concurrency Control][8] to detect modifications to keys. Each key is associated
with a version number that is incremented on each update. Transactions are executed through 
partial evaluation. The runtime reads all the keys that accessed or modified by the transaction, and
then evaluates all other operations. Because reads may be nested arbitrarily (in the case of a 
pointer dereference for example), the runtime may require multiple iterations of partial evaluation
to completely evaluate a transaction. Because database reads are batched together, the runtime
is guaranteed to perform a minimal number of roundtrips to and from the database which should 
significantly improve performance of most nontrivial programs.

The runtime also integrates intermediate write-through caching for any non-transactional key-value 
store that supports: ```fetch```, ```update``` and ```invalidate```. The ```fetch``` operation 
retrieves the cached values of a set of keys, the ```update``` operation changes the 
values of a set of keys, and the ```invalidate``` operation removes a set of keys from cache. 
Multiversion Concurrency Control allows the runtime to cache *incoherently* without sacrificing data 
integrity. The runtime speculates about the value of a key by reading a potentially stale version 
from cache, and then validates the cached version number on commit. The runtime *automatically* 
maintains cache coherency by evicting cached key-value pairs that cause version conflicts on commit!

The runtime may operate as a distributed cluster of transaction execution units. Runtimes register 
themselves in ZooKeeper and are automatically discoverable by clients who can remotely execute
transactions over Thrift.

# Compiler
---
Caustic transactions are composed of exactly 29 different operations and 4 different types. These
operations include ```read``` and ```write```, which retrieve and update the value of a database
key, ```branch```, which performs a conditional branch, ```repeat``` which performs a conditional
loop, and arithmetic, logical, and comparison operations like ```add```, ```equal```, and 
```less```.  Crucially, every feature of the Caustic programming language can be represented by
these 29 operations and 4 types, and so everything in Caustic is transactional and race-free.

While very much a work in progress, the Caustic programming language is still packed with features.
It has all the common constructs like pointers, loops, conditionals, variables, functions, and 
objects. It is statically and structurally typed, but features aggressive type inference. It also
compiles into a Scala library that is compatible with all existing frameworks, tooling, and 
infrastructure for the JVM. Consider the following example of a distributed counter written in 
Caustic. This program can be executed without modification on *any* transactional key-value store, 
and run simulatenously without error on *any* number of machines. 

```
module caustic.example

/**
 * A total quantity.
 * 
 * @param value Current total.
 */
record Total {
  value: Int
}

/**
 * A distributed counting service.
 */
service Counter {
  
  /**
   * Increments the total and returns the current value.
   * 
   * @param x Total reference.
   * @return Current value.
   */
  def increment(x: Total&): Int = {
    if x.value {
      x.value += 1
    } else {
      x.value = 1
    } 
  }

} 
```

[1]: https://github.com/ashwin153/caustic
[2]: https://samyusridhar.github.io/
[3]: https://docs.datastax.com/en/cql/3.1/cql/cql_intro_c.html
[4]: https://docs.arangodb.com/3.1/AQL/
[5]: https://www.mongodb.com
[6]: https://aws.amazon.com/dynamodb/
[7]: https://university.mongodb.com/
[8]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiversion_concurrency_control
